The Project Gutenberg eBook of Harper's Young People, November 29, 1881
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Harper's Young People, November 29, 1881


Author: Various

Release date: October 8, 2015 [eBook #50163]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Annie R. McGuire


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, NOVEMBER 29, 1881 ***



Produced by Annie R. McGuire








[Illustration: HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE]

       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. III.--NO. 109. PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK. PRICE FOUR
CENTS.

Tuesday, November 29, 1881. Copyright, 1881, by HARPER & BROTHERS. $1.50
per Year, in Advance.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration: "SEE, THEY'RE GETTING AWAY!' HE CRIED."]

HOW TOM PRIMROSE PROTECTED HIS FATHER.

BY SYDNEY DAYRE.


Mr. Primrose arrived at home one morning just as his family were
gathering for breakfast. He had been for two days at a small town about
thirty miles distant, to which he had been summoned to assist in the
trial of a pair of noted criminals.

"You look tired out," said Mrs. Primrose.

"Tired enough," he said. "I have been up nearly all night."

"How did that happen?"

"Well, it was partly my own fault. I met my old friend Philip Sanford up
there; he was on the defense in the case I was prosecuting. We had a
grand tilt over it--fought each other vigorously all the way through.
The chief criminal shook his fist at me when I was making the closing
speech. I began to see that the case was going against me, and I pressed
the rascals pretty hard."

"Dear me!" said Mrs. Primrose, with an anxious face. "I am always in
fear of some of those desperate characters doing you some injury out of
revenge."

The gentleman laughed. "Don't worry yourself, dear," he said. "There is
much more to be feared from the rogues who go uncaught than from those
who feel the strong grasp of the law. But, as I was telling, the case
went to the jury about nine last night, and then Sanford and I got down
to a game of chess. If I didn't beat him at law, I beat him well at the
game, and it was one o'clock before we took heed of the time. Then, as
my train was due at three, it was not worth while to go to bed, so we
played and talked on. When I got to the station, I found the train was
behind time, so I lay on a bench till it came, at five, and here I am."

"You will take a rest now?"

"Not a bit," he said, opening some letters he had found waiting for him.
"Business is pressing just now. Ha! ha!" he exclaimed, "this is good
news. We'll have those rogues in the penitentiary yet."

"What is it?" asked Mrs. Primrose.

"Why, I told you just now that I feared the jury would not convict on
the evidence, although it was convincing to me. Here is a letter from
the sheriff of Hancock County, who wishes that these same fellows be
held to answer to a charge of complicity in a bank robbery which took
place in that county some months since. If the jury fails to convict,
the prisoners must be re-arrested the moment they are discharged."

"Rather a damper on them, I should say," said Frank, with a chuckle.

"You'd be astonished to see what decent-looking men they are," continued
his father. "The chief criminal would impress you as having been trained
for a gentleman, and his accomplice is not much more than a boy; both
are well dressed. The daintiest little pearl-mounted revolver I ever saw
was displayed in court as the instrument used in their last scrape;
Frank, you must take a run up to Homer on the nine train."

"He can not," said Mrs. Primrose. "I'm sorry, but he sprained his foot
yesterday, and must keep quiet for a few days."

"That's bad--for the boy and for me. I must hurry down town and send
some one else."

"Oh, papa, let _me_ go!" said Tom. "Please do, sir. I've been up there
twice with you, you know, and I'd know just where to go, and you could
tell me just what to do."

"Ho! ho!" laughed Frank. "'Heedless Tom' on important business! Why, he
would be sure to have the judge and sheriff under arrest, and the
burglars at large. He can't help doing everything backward, you know."

"Come, Frank, don't be so sharp," said his mother. "Tom is trying to be
more careful lately, I think."

"Yes," said Mr. Primrose, in a teasing tone, "he is not at all like the
boy I sent from the office last week to buy a pamphlet called 'Westward
Ho!' and who brought me instead a garden hoe."

There was a laugh at Tom's expense, but he persisted, coaxingly:

"Do let me go, papa. You know I wouldn't be careless about your
business."

"I guess you may go, Tom. Now listen. Find Sheriff Carroll either at his
house or at the court-house, and give him this letter. Take the twelve
train home, and be sure you are on time. There is money for your fare."

So Mr. Primrose departed, while Tom, highly delighted at the prospect of
such an unexpected little jaunt, went to get ready. He meant to act
through the whole matter with such caution and judgment as to fully
convince his father of the propriety of intrusting him with the
weightiest concerns. And his first care was to leave for the station in
such good time as to put all fear of his missing the train out of the
question.

Alas, poor Tom!

"Now, where's my hat?"

This inquiry was a sound of dismay in the Primrose household. Tom's hat
was always missing. There was no spot in the house, yard, barn, or
garden where it might not be hopefully searched for.

"Where did you have it last?" some one asked. Some one was always sure
to ask that.

"I don't know--yes, I remember putting it on Rover's head, and he ran
away with it. No, I found it after that behind the coal-house. I had it
when we were playing hide-and-seek last evening."

Tom was usually left to do his own hunting, but in such an emergency as
this all the family energy was aroused. Uneasiness gathered in every
face as time went on.

"Let me see your old hat," said his mother at last. But the old hat
proved to be too shabby to be thought of. Then his brother's hat was
tried, but Frank was three years older, and it would not do.

"Wear it down to Mr. Ramsay, the hatter's," said his mother. "Tell him
of your difficulty, and he will lend you a hat for a few hours." But Tom
did not like to do this, and he continued his hunt longer than was
prudent. At length his little sister came from the barn with a note of
triumph and the missing hat. It had been lying in a corner of the
hay-loft, where he had hidden the evening before. He seized it
gratefully, and was off like the wind.

The locomotive was hissing in the station as Tom, hot and out of breath,
asked for a ticket to Homer. Then he felt for his pocket-book in one
pocket and then another, growing hotter as he failed to find it. After
thorough search he concluded, with intense dismay, that his run must
have shaken it from his pocket. He knew he had no time for thought. At
the distance of about half a block was situated the office of one of his
father's friends. He rushed over to it and told his trouble in a few
words.

"Hurry, Tom, hurry," said the gentleman, as already the premonitory puff
of the engine sounded. "Don't stop for a ticket, but board the train--if
you can; but--_Stop, boy!_ Hallo, there!" he shouted; "don't let that
boy jump on that train!"

He ran after Tom as he flew toward the now-moving train, which the boy
was fully resolved to board. But he was seized by friendly hands.

"You can't do that, my boy--no, _sir_," as Tom struggled. "Have you no
concern for your life or limbs?"

"I _must_ go on that train; I _will_," cried poor Tom, in utter despair.
But it moved pitilessly on, while a few men gathered near to inquire
into his trouble.

"It was about some business for my father," he explained, hardly able to
force back his tears, as he realized what a terrible failure he had made
at the very outset. "It was very important, and what shall I do?"

"There's a freight train going up," said a brakeman.

"When?" asked Tom, eagerly.

"In about half an hour. It'll be slow, though. You'll get to Homer about
eleven, if that'll do you."

Tom could only hope it might.

After a ride made long by anxiety he stood at last before Sheriff
Carroll, and presented his letter, waiting breathlessly to hear what he
might say.

"Too bad! too bad! I discharged those scamps not more than an hour ago.
Tell your father, though, that we may stand a chance of nabbing them
yet. I'll have all the trains watched, and send out on the country
roads. That sort are very apt to strike across country." He bustled away
to set things moving, while Tom, full of bitter mortification, slowly
walked back to the station.

He watched eagerly as the return train came in, in hope of seeing some
kind of a "scrimmage," as he mentally expressed it, which might look
like an arrest. But nothing of the sort occurred. He did not even see a
force of policemen drawn up with threatening aspect, as he had expected,
and made up his mind that Carroll was not up to his duty in this matter.
His inexperienced gaze failed to take note of two or three keen-eyed men
standing carelessly around in plain clothes, who would certainly have
pressed the hospitalities of the village of Homer upon any stray
criminals so warmly as to enable them to arrive at a speedy decision to
travel no further at present.

As Tom rode along, he felt too much depressed at first by the very bad
result of his undertaking to pay much heed to what was going on around
him. But he suddenly jerked himself from the corner into which he had
settled, and sat up with every sense on the alert.

"I told Primrose--revenged on him--jury agreed--got off--that I would go
down--have it out with him--"

This was what came to his ears, mingled with the rattle of the cars. The
words were spoken by one of two men who occupied the seat behind him.
Tom ventured a peep over the back of his seat. They certainly did not
look like desperate characters; but what was he to think of what he had
heard? His father had made special mention of the very respectable
appearance of the two men he had been prosecuting.

The older man had such a pleasant face that Tom was beginning to feel
ashamed of his suspicions, when he suddenly bobbed down in his seat,
with a cold chill at his heart. The man was examining something he held
in his hand--a thing so small and delicate that at first glance Tom had
taken it for a pocket-knife, but it was a pearl-mounted revolver. The
full gravity of the situation now forced itself upon his excited mind.
This was the Chief Criminal spoken of by his father, the younger man
being, of course, the Accomplice. They were handling the very revolver
which had been shown during the trial. This man's fierce anger had been
excited by his father's vigorous attempt to consign him to merited
punishment, and his words fully indicated that he was now on his way to
seek revenge. How? Poor Tom fairly writhed in his seat as all the
fearful possibilities of the case came before him, and he was obliged to
own to himself that but for his petty acts of carelessness these men
would now be safe under lock and key.

He left the car, full of the one idea of using any and every means of
insuring his father's safety. Hastening to his office, he learned that
he had been absent from it most of the day. It was supposed that he had
been called out of town again. Reaching home, hoping to find him there,
Tom learned that he had not been up to dinner, but was still expected,
though it was long after the usual hour. Hot, tired, and anxious, Tom
made but a poor attempt at the dinner urged upon him, and took his way
to the front part of the house to watch for his father. He established
himself on a sofa near a bay-window in the parlor, with a very heavy
pressure of care on his heart. He knew it would not do to tell his
nervous mother: even poor, heedless Tom was thoughtful of her comfort.
And he did not want Frank to know anything about it if he could help it.
It might all come out right yet, and then only his father need know.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Tell him not to hurry--we can wait," said a voice in the room. Tom
rubbed his eyes and stared about, as the maid showed in two strangers.
He was wide awake in a moment, and drew himself into a corner of the
sofa where he was nearly concealed by a curtain which divided the
bay-window from the room. The maid drew aside the curtains of another
window, and threw it open. And there, in the bright sunlight, Tom saw,
with fright and horror, which at first took from him the power to move
or speak, the Chief Criminal and the Accomplice seat themselves
comfortably in his father's house.

What now? With a desperate effort at self-control he tried to think what
it was best to do. It rested on him now not only to insure his father's
safety, but to prevent the escape of these men.

He presently got up, and going quietly to a door which led into another
room, locked it, and put the key in his pocket. Then he turned to the
window near which the men sat. The older one addressed him pleasantly.

"You are a son of Mr. Primrose?" he said, offering his hand.

Tom bowed slightly, but took no notice of the extended hand. He lowered
the window and fastened it, hoping that the burglars, if they tried to
open it, might not at first understand the catch, thus giving more time.
He then passed into the hall, noiselessly locking that door also.

Frank was nursing his sprained foot on the back piazza. In answer to
Tom's excited inquiries he told him their father had returned home a
short time since, had dined, and gone to his room. His mother was in the
kitchen canning fruit. Glad not to meet her, Tom sprang up the stairs,
and knocking at his father's door, begged to be let in.

"I am bathing, Tom," was the answer; "wait a little."

"Oh, father," pleaded Tom, "_do_ let me speak to you just one minute."

Tom's claims to be heard were usually urgent, so his father only said,
"Have a little patience, my boy; in ten minutes I'll hear all you have
to say."

Ten minutes! What might not happen in ten minutes! If he waited up
there, the criminals might, finding themselves shut in, guess that they
were under suspicion, and make good their escape. If he went to call
help, his father might, in his absence, run into the very danger he was
seeking to save him from.

A bright thought came to him. So long as his father remained in his room
he must be safe. Tom turned the key in the door, and locked him in.
Then, with all the speed which terror could lend to a boy's nimble feet,
he ran to the police station, a few blocks distant, reaching it in a
condition which only left him able to convey a general idea that
something dreadful was going on at Mr. Primrose's. Two policemen were
there. First sending a message to head-quarters for further force, they
followed Tom in all haste, a small crowd of by-standers falling into
line, and gathering strength as they neared the Primrose domicile. As
they came to the gate Tom saw the Accomplice trying to open the window.

"See! they're getting away!" he cried. And the policemen bounded into
the house and seized the two men. At this moment a heavy pounding was
heard overhead. Tom turned paler than before.

"There must be more of them up stairs," he shrieked; "they are getting
after my father."

He tore up the stairs, and found the room still locked; but the pounding
kept on. He turned the key with a trembling hand.

"Who locked me in?" exclaimed his father. "Such foolery--" He stopped
in surprise as half a dozen men tramped hastily up stairs.

"Are you hurt, Mr. Primrose? Are the rascals in there?"

"Hurt? No. What's the matter? what is all this fuss about?" He stared in
amazement at the crowd pressing into the hall. "Is the house on fire?"

"Not a bit, sir; but we've got two of the men in there."

He pushed his way down stairs, and was met by several policemen, who had
made their way through the crowd outside. As the principal excitement
seemed in the parlor, he turned that way. The eyes of all there were
fixed upon two quiet-looking men, who stood with a policeman's hand on a
shoulder of each.

"Philip Sanford! What does all this mean?"

"I must ask you that," was the answer. "I came to your house on a
friendly visit, and to introduce my nephew, who is desirous of becoming
a law student in your office"--motioning toward the younger man--"and I
find myself under arrest."

The policemen dropped their hands and looked toward Mr. Primrose. Mr.
Primrose looked at them.

"Why are you here, men?" he asked.

"The little chap wanted us pretty badly," said one of them, turning to
Tom with a laugh.

"I--thought they were the criminals, papa--had come to hurt you, and I
couldn't speak to you, and I locked you up. I didn't know what to
do--and you said the burglars were such nice-looking men." A laugh arose
at this.

"Go on," said his father; "I don't understand yet."

"The burglars were gone when I got to Homer; they sat behind me on the
cars, and talked about being revenged on you, papa; and one of them had
that revolver." Tom's voice broke, and he seized his father's hand.

The two criminals laughed heartily.

"I believe I see into it now," said Mr. Sanford. "I said I was coming
here to get revenge for the beating you gave me at chess. This
revolver"--he took it from his pocket--"was given me this morning by the
burglar I have been defending, as a token of his gratitude, as he
expressed it, for the able manner in which I had conducted his case. And
this poor little fellow"--looking kindly at Tom--"has been suffering
agonies of fear for his father's safety ever since I showed it in the
cars."

"So, friends," said Mr. Primrose, looking around, "I thank you all for
coming to my protection, but you see I do not need it."

The police led the way out, and others followed, with increasing
merriment at the mistake which had been made. A shout arose also from
the crowd outside as it left the premises.

"I beg your pardon, sir; and yours," faltered poor Tom, with his
strongest effort to keep back the tears of mortification at the terrible
blunder he had committed.

"No pardon is necessary," said Mr. Sanford. "If my own small boy lives
to your age, the best I can wish for him is that he may be as brave and
energetic as you have been to-day, and as faithful in watching for his
father's safety, even if it sometimes leads him into a mistake. You'll
take my hand now, my boy, won't you?"

Tom grasped it, and then escaped to his room. There lay his pocket-book,
just where he had left it when he changed his clothes in the morning. He
threw himself on the bed and cried till sleep came to relieve his
troubles.

When he awoke it was twilight, and his mother was beside him.

"Come, dear," she said, "they are all waiting for you. Yes, you must go
down," as Tom shook his head: "they will not go to tea till you go down.
And look at this--your father received it about an hour ago."

It was a telegram from Homer, and read thus:

     "Have caught the men, and shipped to Hancock County.

  "CARROLL."




[Illustration: "THE HUNT IS UP, THE MORN IS BRIGHT AND
GRAY."--SHAKSPEARE.]

THE HUNTING SEASON.

BY W. A. LINN.


The boy whose fortune it is to live in the country looks forward to the
advent of autumn with eagerness, if happily he belongs to that large
class of boys who have a passion for hunting. There are some people who
object to this trait in the character of boys, as indicative of cruelty,
but I doubt if they fully understand the trait. Very few hunters, old or
young, take pleasure in the mere act of killing birds and animals. If
this was the chief end in view, they could secure it without days of
toilsome tramping. A hunter's pleasure is made up of a great deal more
than success in filling his bag. If he is to be really an expert in his
work, he must study carefully the habits of the game which he pursues,
become acquainted with the country over which he is to hunt, and submit
to long practice with his gun or rifle.

The most common object of pursuit with boy hunters in our New England
and Middle States is the rabbit. The more mature sportsman may look with
scorn on the "cotton-tail" if he pleases, and rejoice more over one
dead quail than the capture of a dozen rabbits. Not so the boy. With
boys, _size_ counts in a good many ways. Then, too, in rabbit-hunting,
boys get a variety of sport. They can find time after school to set a
few snares or dead-falls in the nearest thicket. Or on a Saturday,
taking such dogs as they own or can borrow (most dogs, like most boys,
seem to be ready to hunt rabbits), they can set out for the brush lots
and stubble fields, and revel in excitement as the sharp bark of the
dogs lets them know that a fresh track has been struck.

When cold weather and snow come, the rabbit is apt to desert his
snuggery in the fields for a home in some well-built stone wall. Then
the boy hunter lets the rabbit betray himself, and very plainly he does
it; for no boy who is once shown a rabbit track in newly fallen snow can
ever mistake for it the track of any other animal: two dots before, and
two behind, like this, · · :, are the rabbit's handwriting, and a little
skill soon traces him to his hiding-place.

To secure game birds requires more skill with the gun, and a more
intimate knowledge of their habits. Our principal game birds in the
Eastern States are the woodcock, the quail, and the ruffled grouse, or,
as it is called in some States, the partridge. Of these the woodcock is
the most mysterious, and by epicures the most highly prized. It is the
only one of the group that seeks a warmer climate in winter.

With the first advent of spring weather the woodcock returns, often
nesting so early that the spring floods destroy its eggs. By the first
of July the young birds are almost grown, and in too many States the law
allows them to be killed after that date. The summer woodcock is,
however, no such bird as it will become if allowed to moult, and then to
grow fat in the corn fields and brakes. October finds it strong of wing,
ready for a night flight of many miles; then it may be sought not only
in the low grounds, but on the alder-covered hill-sides.

The quail is the best known of all our game birds, because of its
remaining with us all the year round, because of its easily recognized
note, "Bob White," and because, timid as it is, it loves civilization,
and lives on cultivated lands.

The ruffled grouse may be called the king of our Northern game birds.
Delighting in mountains and thick swamps, wild, and strong of wing, the
hunter who brings one down when under full headway must be of steady
nerve, quick sight, and skillful with long practice.

If a modern artist were to draw a sketch to illustrate an article on our
hunting season, it would have to differ very much from the pretty
picture on the preceding page. The spear and cross-bow are weapons
unknown to modern American hunters, and instead of the winding of the
horn, there is only the shrill note of the dog whistle. And we may say,
Alas the change! The spear was not always thrown aright; it and the
arrow hit but one object at a time, and had a limit to their flight. But
nowadays, with our highly trained dogs, and our ever-loaded
breech-loading guns, able to mow down a whole flock at once, what chance
has bird or animal, however well provided by nature with means of
safety?

Little is the wonder that our game grows scarcer year by year. With no
vast landed estates, as in England, to be kept stocked and preserved, it
will not be very long before woodcock, quail, and grouse will be
curiosities even to the farmers' boys, who will have to invent some new
pleasure to take the place of the hunting sports of which their
grandfathers will tell them.




[Illustration: CLAVICHORD.]

THE PIANO-FORTE.

BY MRS. JOHN LILLIE.


I wonder how many young people who sit down to practice or take a lesson
at the piano-forte know the story of the instrument now familiar in
every household of the civilized world. Look at it as we have it to-day,
almost perfect in size and quality and tone. It is capable of producing
the fullest and the softest sounds, just as its name indicates, for
_piano_ means soft, and _forte_ means loud. Can you realize that little
more than a hundred years ago pianos were a rarity? Only one or two
makers produced any instruments worthy of the name, and few households
possessed one. "But," I can hear my young readers exclaim, "the music we
play on our pianos--Bach and Haydn, as well as old English airs--were
certainly played on some horizontal instrument." Of course they were,
but not on our kind of piano-fortes; and the story I am going to tell
will take you back far into the sixteenth century, when ladies of rank,
and monks and nuns, and some troubadours, had the instruments from which
our piano is descended. These were known as the clavichord and the
virginal.

The clavichord was perfected about 1500, and the name was derived from
"clavi" (a key) and "chorda" (a string); so you see at once that it
contained the two principal elements of our piano-forte. Although it
went out of use in Bach's day, yet that dear old master, whose
_gavottes_ all our young people are playing now, loved to use it. The
piano-forte had been invented, but Bach loved his old clavichord. As he
sat thrumming it, I think he liked to fancy himself away in the early
sixteenth-century days, when Henry the Seventh's court enjoyed madrigals
and queer little bits of music on the same sort of an instrument.
Following the clavichord, we have that graceful, romantic instrument
called the virginal. This was an improvement on the clavichord, and
toward the close of the sixteenth century we find its name in poetry,
romance, biography--indeed, in history.

[Illustration: VIRGINAL.]

The virginal produced a low, tinkling sort of sound not unlike that of
the German zither. Only ladies of quality, musicians, or nuns or monks
in convents, performed upon the virginal, and so I think we associate it
with all the grace and beauty and the slow stateliness of that romantic
epoch. When I think of a virginal, it seems to me to bring many
suggestions of rich colors, softly fading lights, the flash of jewels,
or the movement of white hands, oak wainscoting, and tapestried
walls--perhaps some very sad and sorrowing heart, perhaps some young and
hopeful one, but always something that is picturesque and dreamy.

Perhaps we would not think it so sweet an instrument to-day, but
assuredly in the sixteenth century it moved people to very tender,
elevated thoughts. Shakspeare wrote of it with deep feeling, and there
are some quaint lines of Spenser's about it. "My love doth sit ...
playing alone, careless, on her heavenlie virginals."

In 1583, Sir James Melvil was sent by Mary Stuart to England as
Ambassador, and in his memoirs he relates how he heard Queen Elizabeth
play. He says that Lord Hunsden took him up into a "quiet gallery,"
where, unknown to the Queen, he might hear her play. The two gentlemen
stood outside a tapestried doorway, from within which came the soft
tinkle-tinkle of the virginal. I wish he had told us what the Queen was
playing. Presently, it appears, his curiosity to see her Majesty
overcame his prudence, and he softly raised the curtain, and went into
the room. The Queen played on, "a melody which ravished him," he says,
but for some moments did not see that any one was listening. Is it not a
pretty picture?

At that time the Queen had not lost the charm of youth, and in her
splendid dress, with her head down-bent, her figure at the quaint
virginal against the rich and sombre colors of the room, must have
looked charming, and the silent Scotch gentleman just inside the doorway
listening in rapt attention: it is so poetic a picture of the time that
we can almost hear her music, and if we read on a little further, we see
that the Queen, suddenly seeing Sir James, came forward, remonstrating
with him for having come in, for, she said, she was not used to play
before people, but only to "shun melancholy." Then she sat down upon a
low cushion, and honest Sir James, according to the custom of the time,
fell upon his knees before her. The Queen, with a truly feminine spirit,
inquired whether he thought she or Mary Queen of Scots played the best.
Sir James said that his sovereign played "_reasonably, for a queen_."
This answer would not serve to-day, as the Queen of England is one of
the most perfect of amateur musicians.

[Illustration: ITALIAN SPINET, ORNAMENTED WITH PRECIOUS STONES.]

The virginal and spinet belong to the same period. From them, as need of
a more elaborate performance grew, we have the harpsichord. A very fine
harpsichord looked something like a grand piano, but it had two rows of
keys, one upper and one lower. I shall not here go into a description of
the harpsichord. It is only needful to say that it was the outgrowth of
clavichord and virginal and spinet, and had some of the defects as well
as the good points of all three.

[Illustration: HANDEL'S FAVORITE HARPISCHORD.]

Our great-grandmothers played upon harpsichords. They were tinkling
little affairs, yet I fancy that Mozart's and Haydn's music must have
sounded very quaint and pleasing upon them. Where have they all vanished
to, I wonder?--along with the flowery brocaded gowns, the slender fans,
the powder and patches and paint, of that dear old time?

In an old house I once visited, a harpsichord of seventeen hundred and
something used to stand neglected and disused in an upper hall.
Sometimes we children thrummed waltzes upon it; sometimes I remember our
getting out a faded old music-book with the picture of a shepherdess on
it, and picking out the funny little songs that were printed there a
hundred years ago. On the fly-leaf of the book was written in a very
flourishy hand, "To Isabel, from J----." Who was Isabel, and who was J.,
we used to wonder.

I can fancy that the music she played to please her mamma and papa, and
perhaps her uncles and aunts, was of a very primitive order, for when
harpsichords were used, young ladies were not at all proficient. Music
was then considered a "genteel" sort of accomplishment, and good masters
were very rare, and never tried to make their pupils do more than strike
the notes correctly and in good "dum-dum" sort of time. Consider our
advantages now, and yet I fancy those young people of "Isabel's" day
valued their musical instruction much more than we do ours.

[Illustration: PIANO OF ABOUT 1777.]

Well, then, from this pretty, picturesque harpsichord period, we find
ourselves by slow degrees in that of the piano, and I suppose the first
thing you will wish to know is how a piano-forte differs from these
other instruments of which I have been writing. The principal difference
is that the strings are struck with a hammer. About the beginning of the
eighteenth century this idea had originated with three men at once--an
Italian named Cristofali, a Frenchman named Marius, and a German named
Schröter; but all investigators seem convinced that Cristofali was the
real originator. His ideas were the best. So, later in the century,
when harpsichords began to be thought incomplete, different makers tried
to produce something better, and the result was the primitive
piano-forte.

At this time the composer Sebastian Bach was in Berlin. Frederick the
Great was eager to hear him play, and as that famous sovereign possessed
several of the new piano-fortes (or forte-pianos, as they then were
called), Bach came one evening to the palace, where a crowd of gay
ladies and gentlemen were assembled.

The composer had to go from room to room, trying first one of the new
pianos, then another. These instruments were manufactured in Germany,
but, later, English and French pianos took the palm, and about the
beginning of this century American ladies were growing proficient in the
art of piano-playing--proficient at least for that day. Have you not all
seen your grandmammas' music-books, in which "The Battle of Prague" is
an honored "piece"? True, there were hundreds of nobler works, but only
public performers seem to have attempted them.

As time went on, and the interest in the instrument grew, the mechanism
of the piano-forte was improved, and at this date (1881), it is
considered perfect. Here and there as you play, as you listen to the
sounds of the little hammer falling on the strings, let your thoughts
wander back to Mary Queen of Scots and Elizabeth of England, with their
virginals and spinets--indeed, farther into the' realm of poetic, dreamy
sound, for beyond these were clavicytheriums, citoles and citherns,
dulcimers and psalteries, and in the East, among the people whom we see
now in sculpture, a whole line of lyres and harps and lutes.

It may not seem that so far away as early Egyptian days was the first
idea of our piano, yet certainly such is the case. In some far Eastern
country you might see, graven in stone of centuries gone by, a figure
holding an instrument dimly shadowing that on which you now may play all
written music.




PERILS AND PRIVATIONS.

BY JAMES PAYN.

THE WRECK OF THE "GROSVENOR."--(_Continued._)


The wanderers still occasionally came across the natives. Once, on
arriving at a village, they obtained a young bullock in exchange for
buttons, a few of which the savages had left on their coats; and that
the distribution of this godsend might be equal, the whole was cut in
pieces, and, just as I have seen done with a cake at school, one of the
party, standing with his back to it, named the person who should have
the piece held up. But generally the natives denied them everything.
Once they strove to barter some poor relic of their property for a calf,
which the others appeared to agree to, "but no sooner had they got the
price than the calf was driven away."

On one occasion only did they exhibit the slightest pity. On the party
coming upon another dead whale, a band of natives surrounded them, but
on perceiving their sad condition, and that there was really nothing
more to steal, they forbore to molest them, and one of them even lent
his lance, with which some chunks of blubber were cut out.

A little afterward they found two planks on a sandy bank, in each of
which was a nail. "Elated," as we are told, "with this valuable
discovery," they set fire to the planks, and getting out the nails,
"flattened them between two stones into something like knives." A few
yards further on, by turning up the sand, they found water, of which
they had been much in want; and here, with much thankfulness, they
rested. This was the last day of what seemed to these poor souls good
fortune.

They did indeed fall in with a dead shark, but it was in such an
advanced stage of decay that "the liver only could be eaten." Nay,
driven by the extremity of hunger, the carpenter ate of some deadly
berries, and was poisoned. Now this man it was who from the first, until
the hour of his death, had taken care of the little boy; who had striven
to relieve those fatigues which his tender limbs could so little endure;
"who had heard his complaints with pity; who had fed him when he could
obtain wherewithal to do it," and who had lulled his weary little body
to rest.

No human work more commends itself to our admiration than that of this
poor carpenter, who reminds us, indeed, of the Carpenter's Son with his
"Suffer little children to come unto me." Even at this distant time,
when that poor boy has been a hundred years "where the wicked cease from
troubling, and the weary are at rest," the tears rise to our eyes when
we think of his forlorn condition, deprived of his noble protector.

"I will take him," said the steward, however, who had now succeeded to
the command, and that good man kept his word. The natives never gave
them so much as a drink of water, though "now and then the women gave a
draught of milk to the little boy," and the little party began to break
down from sheer fatigue and privation. When this took place, from hard
necessity there was no chance but for the rest to leave them.

[Illustration: "THEY CARRIED HIM BY TURNS."]

Only they never dreamed of leaving the boy. "It was marvellous," we are
told, how he supported the journey (and, alas! how much more marvellous,
since he was fated not to survive it after all). "Where the path was
even and good," says John Hynes, in his simple fashion, "the child
walked, and was able to keep pace with the party; when they came to deep
sand or long grass, the people carried him by turns." His only duty was
to keep their fire alight while they explored the sand for food.

It will be remembered that, having no flint and steel, they always
carried torches; and once, in rounding a bluff to shorten the way, the
surf put them out; they came, however, upon the remains of a fire which
some Caffre women had lighted, "and joyfully rekindled them." In
crossing the rivers where there was a ford, they tied their rags in a
bundle, fastened it round their heads, and in it they stuck their
brands, and thus kept them dry. Sometimes great storms would come on,
and the rain fall so heavily that the men had to hold their canvas
frocks over their fire to prevent its being extinguished. Without fire,
they would have been lost indeed.

Many times, from causes over which they had no control, the little party
separated, but they never forgot one another. Those before used to write
upon the sand whatever direction could be of benefit to those behind;
such as, "Turn in here, and you will find wood and water." It makes the
heart bleed to think that so much tenderness and good-fellowship,
maintained under such trying circumstances, should have failed in the
end, and have been shown, as it were, for nothing. And yet it was not
for nothing. It is impossible to believe that those brave men have not
gained their reward, and some great reward for their terrible
sufferings. And as to "use," it should be of great and good use to us
all to have such an example set before us.

Sometimes those left behind would turn up again, having proceeded, when
a little refreshed, by some shorter way; but they had always the same
tale of ill-usage and privation to tell. Hynes himself, having been
wounded by the natives, was left for dead on one occasion, but
recollecting the way his companions intended to pursue by great
exertions he overtook them. "I shall bear the scar of that lance wound
to my grave," he says.

One day the cooper died, and was buried in the sand. This happened in
Hynes's absence, and as he had an affection for the man, he asked to be
shown the spot; but on arriving at it, the body had already been dug up
and carried away by some wild animal, as could be perceived by its
foot-prints. The steward and his charge were now taken ill, and since
the rest could not find it in their hearts to leave the child, they
staid with him. "Having prepared early in the morning whatever could be
obtained for breakfast, and willing to treat his tender frame with all
the indulgence in their power, they meant to call him when everything
was ready. He still rested near the fire, where all had slept during the
night before; but on going to wake him, they found his soul had taken
flight to another world." These are the words in which John Hynes
describes the misfortune which he evidently considers the worst that had
hitherto befallen them. As for the steward, "the loss," we are told,
"of one who had been so long the object of his care nearly overcame him.
It was with the utmost difficulty his companions got him along."

Presently Robert Fitzgerald asks for a shell of water; Hynes supplies
him with one, which he drinks with great avidity. He then asks for
another, which, "having received, he swallows with equal relish, and
laying himself down, instantly expires." They all thought this a very
happy death, and were envious of it. Then William Fruel sinks exhausted
on the sand; his companions from necessity go on to seek wood and water,
but promise to return to him. Turning their eyes back, they see him
crawling after them; but on returning for him after a few hours, they
find some wild beast has carried him away.

It would be painful to describe in detail what they now suffered;
"former distresses were not to be compared to it." One after another
drops from exhaustion; the rest "shake hands with him, and recommending
him to Heaven for that assistance which they themselves can not afford,
leave him to expire." The party of forty-three are at length reduced to
three, John Hynes, Evans, and Wormington, and the senses of even these
are so impaired that they can hardly hear or see. One morning the
torments of thirst become so intolerable that Wormington begs the two
others to cast lots with him as to who shall die for the rest, that by
drinking his blood the other two may survive. To which Hynes replies
that if he (Hynes) drops, they may do what they will with him, but as
long as he can walk he will consent to no such thing. The idea is then
abandoned by common consent, nor is it renewed when Wormington falls,
and "with one feeble effort to rise, stretches himself on the shore,
burying his right hand in the sand."

The next morning the two survivors perceive some objects which to their
failing powers look like "large birds." They turn out to be four of
their own party, who had been left behind, now nearly blind, and almost
reduced to idiocy. It was a most ghastly meeting. Since they could no
longer search narrowly for food, they would certainly have now starved
to death but for watching the motions of certain sea-birds, which, after
scratching in the sand, they perceived let something drop out of their
beaks. On searching for themselves, the poor men found that the birds
were catching shell-fish which had burrowed in the sand.

On the one hundred and seventeenth day of their journey, (though they
knew nothing themselves of dates) these six unfortunates at last met
with a European--a Dutch settler. "Their joy was such that, combined
with their weak condition, it could only be expressed by convulsive
movements." But "after gaining some composure," they learned they were
within the limits of the settlements, and not above three hundred miles
from the Cape of Good Hope.

They were received with the utmost hospitality, which it seemed was
offered with some imprudence, since on being supplied with bread and
milk, "their voracity was such as to have almost proved their
destruction." After being carefully nursed, and in some degree
recovered, they were forwarded in carts to the nearest town, which was
two hundred miles distant. "During the whole way, wherever they passed
the night, the farmers assembling to hear their sad story, and
supplying them with all of which they stood in need."

Nay, notwithstanding that England and Holland were then at war, the
Dutch Governor of the Cape of Good Hope dispatched a very strong
expedition through the country in quest of the other castaways, should
any still remain. They met William Hubberly, servant of the second mate,
staggering on alone, "melancholy and forlorn." On other parts of the
road they met seven Lascars and two of the black female servants. From
these they learned that five days after the ship's company had separated
another division of the party took place, but what had become of the
others they knew not. They had seen the Captain's coat, however, on one
of the natives, from which they gathered that he was dead. No further
information could be obtained, and so violent was the opposition of the
Caffres that the expedition was compelled to return.

Seven years afterward Colonel Gordon, while travelling in Caffraria, was
informed by a native that there was a white woman among his countrymen,
with a child whom she frequently embraced, and over whom she wept
bitterly. Bad health compelled the Colonel to return home, but he sent
her a letter in French, Dutch, and English, begging that some sign, such
as a burned stick, or other token, might be returned in answer to it,
when every exertion should be made for her recovery; but nothing more
was ever heard of her. Nevertheless, for years there was a general
belief at the Cape that some of the unfortunate ladies still survived,
who had it in their power to return, but that having been compelled to
marry Caffre chieftains, and "apprehending that their place in society
was lost, and that they should be degraded in the eyes of their equals,"
they resolved to abide where they were.




[Illustration: THE DOLLS' RECEPTION AT REPUBLICAN HALL, THIRTY-THIRD
STREET, NEW YORK.--DRAWN BY MRS. JESSIE SHEPHERD.]

THE DOLLS' RECEPTION.


This beautiful engraving will give our little readers an idea of an
entertainment which is now being held in Republican Hall, Thirty-third
Street, New York city, where, instead of grown people or children being
the important personages, three hundred dollies are dressed up in
magnificent toilets, waiting to receive the visits and admiration of
their friends.

The dollies do not talk, with the exception of a few who say "Papa" and
"Mamma"; but they are all arranged in groups representing beautiful
pictures. Some of these have backgrounds of painted scenery, and all
have appropriate surroundings to perfect the tableaux.

There are a "model school," with dormitory, school-room, and
play-ground; a christening, with the minister and baby and a party of
friends; a kitchen, with a whole family of darkies; a dozen children
"coasting"; a real log-cabin, to be used as a baby-house; and last, and
prettiest of all, the heroes and heroines of every nursery: Mother Goose
and her children, dressed in costumes which the modern picture-books
have made popular; Red Riding-hood, Polly Flinders, Bobby Shaftoe and
the little lady he left behind him, Little Bopeep, Mistress Mary, Tom
Tucker, Willy Boz, Tom, Tom, the Piper's son, and his audience, and a
great many others.

Among such a vast number of dollies there are of course a great many
babies. These are all placed in the "Nursery," where they are waited
upon and attended by full-grown dolls, dressed neatly, and with pretty
little nurses' caps. Everything is provided in the way of cradles,
rattles, and baby-jumpers for these very little folks, and they are so
well cared for and amused that their papas and mammas, who are busy
taking part in the tableaux, need have no concern about them.

Taking it altogether, the exhibition is a pleasant place to visit. The
dolls are all well dressed, and will be sold at prices which, by
comparison, are not unreasonable; but they will not be removed from
their places in the tableaux until after the exhibition is concluded.

And now for the object. Several years ago a half-dozen young ladies set
to work to raise three thousand dollars to build a little cottage
somewhere on the sea-shore, which might afford a comfortable summer home
to such of the children as were able to bear removal from the Children's
Hospital, on Thirty-fourth Street and Ninth Avenue. This institution is
managed by the Sisters of St. Mary, an Episcopal sisterhood, and so well
managed that the ladies wished to place the little summer home also in
their care.

The three thousand dollars was raised long ago; but the project grew, as
such things will, and the house which was built last spring cost, with
the land, about nine thousand dollars. It is situated on Rockaway Beach,
between the large new hotel and Far Rockaway, and will accommodate about
forty children. Some of those who are taken from the hospital will
remain all summer; others will go for ten days or two weeks. In this way
the ladies hope to give health and pleasure to a great many poor little
children, who must otherwise suffer in tenement-houses all summer.

The home will be called "St. Mary's by the Sea." It will be opened early
next summer, and the inmates will be very glad to receive a visit from
any of their friends who are interested in the work.




PEOPLE WE HEAR ABOUT.

WILLIAM S. GILBERT.


If the name of the author of _Pinafore_ were as widely known as is his
work, William S. Gilbert would be one of the most celebrated of living
persons. This gentleman, to whom we owe that delightful comic opera, is
forty-five years of age, and a lawyer by profession, though he does not
now practice law. Unlike "Sir Joseph Porter, K.C.B.," Mr. Gilbert does
not "stick close to his desk," but does "go to sea." In fact, he wrote a
great deal of _Pinafore_ on board the yacht _Pleione_, of which he is
the owner and captain, and doubtless "a right good captain, too." He has
a companion who never leaves him, whose name is Roy. Roy, of course, is
a dog, and besides being a dog he is also a capital sailor, for his
master never goes to sea without him.

It must not be supposed that when Mr. Gilbert and his friend Arthur
Sullivan have finished their opera, and placed it in the theatre
manager's hands, their work is done. If you were to call at Mr.
Gilbert's house while an opera is in preparation at the theatre, you
might find him in his library, with two or three other persons, having a
private performance on their own account.

These are actors who have proved themselves so dull in learning the
business of their parts that, rather than have the performance injured
by poor acting, the author is giving them private instruction. For
besides being the inventor and author of _Pinafore_, the _Pirates_, and
_Patience_, Mr. Gilbert designs all the costumes and scenery, drills the
actors, and is as particular about everything on the stage being
ship-shape as if he were really the captain of a man-of-war.

In addition to the operas named above, Mr. Gilbert has written _The
Sorcerer_, and _Trial by Jury_, several plays, and _The Bab Ballads_, a
book of most delightful nonsense. It may seem an easy thing to make
people laugh, but the author of _Pinafore_ really works very hard. It is
pleasant to think, however, that hard work agrees with him, for it
certainly does not spoil his good-humor.




A LITTLE FAIRY.

BY MRS. M. E. SANGSTER.


  We have a little fairy,
    Who flits about the house,
  As gleeful as a cricket,
    As quiet as a mouse.
  She brings papa his slippers,
    She runs up stairs and down,
  The dearest little fairy
    In all the busy town.




THE TALKING LEAVES.[1]

An Indian Story.

BY WILLIAM O. STODDARD.

CHAPTER IX.

[1] Begun in No. 101, HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE.


There had been a very good reason why neither Steve Harrison nor Murray
came back with the Lipan braves who were sent to bring home the game.
They had been preparing to do so, when they were summoned into the
presence of To-la-go-to-de.

"No Tongue is a great hunter," said the dark-browed leader as they came
forward. "Cougar, big-horn, deer all good. Apache heap better."

"That's what I came for."

"Go find them. Eat a heap. Take Yellow Head. Go all night."

"Any warriors go with me?"

"No. Maybe Apache dog see you. See pale-faces, and not think of Lipans.
Dress Yellow Head. Wash off paint."

It was a genuine stroke of Indian war cunning. The two pale-faces were
to act as scouts in the advance. If the Apaches should happen to see
them, their presence would not suggest the dangerous nearness of a band
of hostile Indians.

It may be the wise old chief added to himself that if both of them were
killed on their perilous errand, the loss to his tribe would be of less
consequence than that of two full-blooded Lipans. His pride of race
would prevent his admitting that he had no brave in his band who was as
well fitted to follow and find Apaches as was No Tongue.

"Now, Steve, we must eat all we know how, and then I'll fix you."

It had not harmed the young hunter in the opinion of his red friends
that he had been unable to conceal his delight at the prospect before
him.

"Young brave," they said, with approving nods. "Glad all over. Make good
warrior some day."

He was indeed "glad all over"; but Murray cautioned him by a look, and
he said nothing.

He was almost too glad to eat, but his appetite came back to him while
he and Murray were cooking. He had eaten nothing since morning, and
mountain air is a very hungry sort of air.

"That's right, my boy. There's no saying when you may get your next
square meal. There's hard work before you and me, and plenty of it."

The next thing that came to Steve was a surprise.

Murray had never worn paint or adopted any more of Indian ways than he
could help, but it was a wonder how soon he made himself look like a
white man. There was more in the pack on his spare pony than Steve had
imagined.

A few minutes' work with a pair of small scissors made a remarkable
change in his hair and beard, and then the long locks of Yellow Head
himself had to suffer.

"Go and scrub off every spot of paint, while I'm rigging my hunting
shirt and leggings. You won't know me when you come back."

That was saying a little too much, but To-la-go-to-de himself expressed
his admiration. He had seen wilder-looking white men by the hundred
among the border settlements. No eyes in the world would suspect No
Tongue of being a Lipan.

The transformation in Steve's appearance was shortly even greater, for
Murray was able to furnish him with a "check" shirt and a black silk
neckkerchief.

"Buckskin trousers'll have to do, my boy. No boots in camp; but I can
knock the wrinkles out of this headpiece for you."

It was a black felt hat, and not very badly worn. Murray himself always
wore one, but the supply had not been good enough for a long time to
allow Steve to do the same.

"Now, Steve, I'm going to make old Two Knives give you the best mount in
camp. Good as mine."

Such a war party never carries any slow horses with it, but there were
some better than others, and the chief was as anxious as Steve that his
scouts should be well mounted. Otherwise they might not be able to get
back to him with any information they might pick up.

"Plenty of ammunition, Steve. Never mind any other kind of baggage,
except some jerked meat. We may have to live on that."

There was no need for To-la-go-to-de to urge them. Not a minute was
thrown away in their rapid preparations, and then the whole band turned
out to see them ride away.

"I tell you what, Steve," said Murray, "we're not dressed in the latest
fashion, but I haven't felt so much like a white man for years. I'll act
like one too."

There was a flash of pain in his eyes as he said that. Could it be he
had ever done anything unworthy of his race and training?

Perhaps, for he had ridden on a great many war-paths with the fierce and
merciless Lipans.

The latter would not follow till morning, and would move less rapidly
than their two scouts, but their progress was not likely to be at all
slow.

Steve Harrison rode on by the side of his friend for some distance
without saying a word.

"What's the matter, Steve?"

"Murray, I don't mean ever to go back to the Lipans."

"Not unless it's necessary."

"It won't be necessary."

"Can't say, Steve. All this country's full of Apaches. We may get a
sight of 'em any minute. I don't much care how soon we do, either."

"I'm not Indian enough for some things, Murray."

"Couldn't you fight Apaches?"

"I suppose I could, if they came to fight me. But I don't want to kill
anybody. I thought you said you were feeling more like a white man."

"Steve, I don't know how I'd feel if I had a white shirt on, and a suit
of civilized clothes. I'm a good deal of a savage yet, as it is."

"I never saw anything very savage about you."

"I'm on the war-path now, Steve, after my old enemies. Let's make as
good time as we can before dark. After that, we'll have to go carefully
till the moon's up."

They were advancing a good deal more rapidly than the Apaches had been
able to do over that same pass, hindered by their long train of tired
pack-ponies, and their women and children.

It was not a difficult trail to follow, for the lodge-pole ends,
dragging on the ground, had so deeply marked it that a man like Murray
could have found it in the dark.

That was precisely what he did, after the sun sank behind the western
mountains, and the deep shadows crept up from the ravines and covered
everything.

After the moon rose it was easier work, and Steve thought he had never
seen anything more beautiful than was the moonlight on the quartz
cliffs, and the forest, and the little lakes in the deep valleys, and on
the foaming streams which came tumbling down the mountain-sides from the
regions of perpetual snow above.

Perhaps he was right, for hardly anybody has ever seen anything more
beautiful in its way than such a moonlight view as that.

There was no time to stop and gaze, for Murray pushed on as fast as
possible without using up their tough and wiry mustangs.

"We may need all the legs they've got to-morrow, Steve. We must find
grass and water for them before daybreak."

It was a good three hours before sunrise, and the moon had again left
them in darkness, when they almost groped their way down a steep
declivity into a small hollow.

"Can't say how much there is of it, Steve, but this'll do. The Apache
ponies have been cropping this very grass within twenty-four hours. Look
at that."

"I can't see it very well."

"Feel of it, then. Don't you understand such a sign as that?"

"It's only a tuft of grass."

"Yes, but I found it ready pulled off, and it hasn't had time to more
than wilt a little. The man that pulled it was here yesterday."

Murray did not know it, but no man had pulled that grass. It was a bunch
Ni-ha-be had gathered for her pony, and then had thrown at Rita. Still,
the guess about the time of it was nearly right, and that was a good
enough place to rest in until daylight.

"No cooking this morning, I suppose?" remarked Steve, when Murray shook
him out of the nice nap he had snatched, wrapped in his "serape," or
Mexican blanket. "No breakfast, eh?"

"You don't know what tales a smoke might tell, or to whom it might tell
'em. Cold meat'll have to do for this time, and glad to get it. After
that, Steve, you'll do the most dangerous riding ever you did."

"Why, are they so near?"

"Can't be many miles. Our first hunt, though, will be for a place to
hide our horses in."

"Why not leave 'em here?"

"I thought of that, but we may need 'em."

Their morning ride was a longer one than Murray imagined, but before
noon he was able to say,

"The backbone of the pass is miles behind us, Steve. All the rest of the
way'll be down hill, or kind of up and down."

"Up and down" it was; but they had barely advanced another half-mile
before Steve exclaimed,

"There they are, Murray!"

"There they are. What a valley it is, too! But, Steve, they don't mean
to stay there--"

[Illustration: "'A SPY-GLASS! I DIDN'T KNOW YOU HAD ONE.'"]

"A spy-glass! I didn't know you had one. How do you tell that they won't
stay?"

"The glass? It's a double one. Some army officer owned it once, I
suppose. I got it of old Two Knives himself. Nobody knows how it came to
him. Look through it."

Steve had seen such things before, but had known very little about them.
He did not even know how very good a glass that was with which he was
now peering down upon the camp of the Apaches.

"See the lodge-poles lying there? In a dozen places?"

"They've put up some lodges."

"If they meant to stay, they'd put up the others. No use for us to go
back. The Lipans are coming along."

"But how can we get any further? We can't ride right through them."

"I should say not. Nor over them, either. But if we can get into that
pine forest over there on the north slope, without being seen, we can
ride around them."

"I'll risk it, Murray."

"So will I, Steve. I'd never let you try a thing like that alone."

"I could do it."

"Perhaps. And you'll have a good many things of that kind to do before
you reach the settlements; but I guess I'll go with you this time."

"You'd better go with me all the way."

Murray said nothing, but he sprang from his horse, and Steve imitated
him.

Men on foot were not so likely to be seen from the Apache camp.

There was nothing in or about the camp which Murray did not carefully
study through his glass, and it showed him what was going on more
clearly and perfectly than even the wonderfully keen black eyes of
Ni-ha-be had seen it from almost the same spot the day before.

"It's a hunting camp, Steve, but it's a very strong party."

"Too strong for our Lipans?"

"I don't know about that. If we could surprise them, by night, we might
do something with them."

"I'm no Lipan, Murray. None of those people down there ever did me any
harm. Did they ever do you any? I don't mean any other Apaches; I'm just
speaking of that camp."

"Well, no, I'm not sure about that. I don't know that I've any special
grudge against this lot."

"Seems to me it's a good deal like an Indian to kill one man for what
another man did. I'm only a boy, and I've been among the Lipans three
years, but I've made up my mind to stay white."

Steve spoke with a good deal of energy, and his robust form seemed to
stand up straighter.

"You're right, Steve--don't you do a thing that isn't fit for your
color. I won't say anything more about myself just now."

If anybody had been listening to those two that morning, or indeed at
any other time, he might have noticed something curious about the way
Steve Harrison talked. It was not to be wondered at that a veteran like
Murray should be slow of speech, and it suited well with his white hair
and his wrinkles.

There was a good reason for it. Except when talking with Murray, Steve
had not heard a word of English for three years.

Yes, there had been one other exception. Whenever he had found himself
all alone, he had talked to himself, asking and answering questions, and
listening to his own pronunciation of the words.

"I shall get among white men some day," he thought, "and it would be a
dreadful thing to be white myself and not to talk white. Anyhow, I've
learned Mexican Spanish since I've been out here, and I'll be glad
enough to forget all I know of Indian talk."

He did not know it, but some things he said sounded ten years older and
wiser just for his manner of saying them. Besides, he had had to think a
great deal, and to keep most of his thoughts to himself. Not a great
many boys do that.

"Come on, Steve. That ledge isn't badly broken. Horses can follow it,
and it heads away right into the pine forest. We must try it."

"We can get almost down into the valley without being seen."

"Yes, and we can find out if any good gap opens out of the valley to the
northward."

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




CHRISTMAS PREPARATIONS.


[Illustration: FIG. 1.--KNITTED AND CROCHET MITTEN.]

Now that Thanksgiving is over, the little folks are of course beginning
to think about Christmas. And how many presents there are to make! And
what are they to be?

The question is so bewildering that we know some of our girl readers
will be glad to receive a suggestion. Who will make a warm pair of
mittens for some cold pair of little hands? If the following directions
are only followed, there will be no trouble:

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--DETAIL OF MITTEN.]

These mittens are worked with white zephyr worsted and steel
knitting-needles of suitable size. The knitted part is all plain, with
the exception of a round of holes, through which is run a cord finished
with balls. The cuff is crocheted in Afghan stitch, and is set on the
mitten. For the mitten make a foundation of 36 stitches; close these in
a ring, and knit, always forward, as follows: 1st and 2d rounds--all
knit plain. 3d round--all purled. 4th round.--Always alternately throw
the thread over, knit two stitches together. 5th round--like the 3d
round. 6th to 50th rounds--all knit plain. But for the thumb gore in the
7th round widen 1 stitch on each side of the first stitch, working 1
knit, 1 purled, on each stitch before and after this stitch. In the
10th, 13th, 16th, 19th, and 21st rounds work one widening in a straight
direction above the widening in the preceding round, the number of
stitches between the widenings increasing by 2 in each round. In the 22d
round take up the stitch of the gore and the stitches on both sides on
separate needles, and finish the thumb in 12 rounds, working always
forward. In the last 4 rounds close the thumb, narrowing three times,
one above another, in a straight direction, at regular intervals, and
work off the remaining 3 stitches together. Lay on the thread anew at
the main part, and finish the mitten, narrowing in the last 8 of the 50
rounds four times at regular intervals, one above another, in a straight
direction, so that in the last round all the stitches are used up. For
the cuff, worked crosswise, make a foundation of 9 stitches, and on
these work 3 pattern rows in Afghan stitch. The 4th pattern row is
worked on the lower vertical veins of the pattern row before the last,
and thus becomes raised. The 6th pattern row is worked on the third, and
the 6th on the 5th pattern row. Repeat always the 4th to 6th pattern
rows until the cuff is of suitable width. Join the stitches of the last
pattern row with the foundation stitches, and edge the cuff with 1 round
as follows: * 1 single crochet on the first edge stitch between the next
2 pattern rows, 4 chain stitches, 1 single crochet on the fifth
following vein below, 4 chain stitches, 1 slip stitch on the first of
the 4 chain stitches before the last, 4 chain stitches, and repeat from
*; finally, 1 slip on the first single crochet in this round.




[Illustration]

BUBBLE BUBBLE BUBBLE

BY MARY A. BARR.


  Bubble, bubble, bubble,
    For the little babies;
  Good oatmeal and milk,
    Fit for lords and ladies.
  Jenny, set the table
    With the spoons and dishes:
  Soon my bonnie bairnies
    Shall have all their wishes.

  Take your places, children;
    Keep the table steady.
  Are your aprons fastened?
    Are your dishes ready?
  And such hungry children
    No doubt will want double;
  So, good pot, keep boiling,
    Bubble, bubble, bubble.




[Illustration: OUR POST-OFFICE BOX.]


Some of our little friends seem to have the impression that there is a
charge made for publishing letters in this Post-office Box, and that
theirs will be published if they send the money to pay for them. This is
a mistake which we wish to correct. No charge is made for either the
letters or exchanges we publish in this department. But even with the
enlarged space now devoted to our young correspondents, we can print
only a selection from the thousands of letters we receive. If we were to
leave out all the bright stories and droll rhymes and all the
instructive articles, and make up HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE of letters only,
we are sure our boys and girls would protest against such a proceeding.
We want them to understand that we are trying to make the very best
Post-office Box that we can, and if the first little letter they send
does not find a niche, they must wait awhile, and then write a second,
and a third.

Scholars in the Latin class must adopt "Dum spiro, spero" as their
motto, and pupils who have not yet begun Latin may take four little
letters, H O P E, for theirs.

Please, when you write to us on business, be careful to sign your names
in full, and give also your full post-office address. Do this in every
case.

Continue to be patient, even if your exchanges do not appear. If only
you knew how fast the exchanges come crowding in, you would understand
why it is that we must keep some of them lying in a pigeon-hole when we
desire very much indeed to have them translated into type.

       *       *       *       *       *

  FORT CUSTER, MONTANA.

     I am a boy thirteen years of age, and live on the Little Horn
     River, about ten miles from Custer's battle-field. We have quite a
     number of cattle and a few horses. There are a great many elk,
     deer, bears, buffaloes, wolves, and coyotes around here, though not
     so many as there were a few years ago. There were a great many
     Indians here in the spring. Two years ago the Crow scouts were
     encamping about five hundred yards from our house, and one morning
     about one o'clock the Sioux Indians came and stole all their
     ponies. They exchanged about one hundred shots, but no one was
     killed. The Crows all came over to our house, and were afraid to go
     back to their tents until daylight. Next morning several soldiers
     started in pursuit of the Sioux, and followed them for nearly three
     weeks before they overtook them. They then had a fight; the
     sergeant was killed, and they captured five Indians, and secured
     the stolen ponies. I have never been out of Montana. I have never
     seen a railroad car in my life.

     I have two brothers and one sister, and a number of pets. My
     brothers hunt antelopes in the winter.

  N. H. D.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WISSAHICKON, PENNSYLVANIA.

     I want to tell you about our bird Hensie. He is very cunning. He is
     a young canary-bird, and likes soaked cracker. One morning my aunt
     put a dry cracker in his cage. He took a piece of it in his bill,
     hopped upon his bath-tub, and dropped the cracker in the water. He
     watched it, and when it was soft, took it out and put it on the
     floor of his cage, and began eating it. He has done this several
     times since then. He tries very hard to sing, and imitates the
     notes of the other canary-bird.

  ROBBIE S. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BOUND BROOK, NEW JERSEY.

     I live on the bank of the Raritan River. Am eight years old, and
     have a nephew fifteen years old, who shot six wild-ducks the other
     day. I had nine pigeons, but they all went away except two. We had
     a dog named Duke, and a man shot him. This is the first time I have
     written to HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE. A friend of mamma's in Brooklyn
     has sent it to us ever since it was published. There are lots of
     robins around here. Give my respects to Jimmy Brown.

  PAUL Q. O.

       *       *       *       *       *

  CHIMACUM, WASHINGTON TERRITORY.

     I live in a lovely valley surrounded by high hills and mountains.
     It is a very pleasant place in summer, but very dreary in winter,
     as nothing can then be seen except snow in every direction. The
     nearest town is called Port Townsend; it is about ten miles from
     here. The Coast Range of mountains looms up in the west, and they
     are really magnificent when the sun shines on them. There is quite
     a large creek flowing through my father's farm, from which we get
     large speckled trout. Many people come from the towns to fish in
     the summer. There is a smelting furnace at the "Beach," two miles
     from here, where iron ore is melted. The place is called Irondale,
     and is the nearest post-office to this valley. There is a great
     amount of bog ore in this valley, and as it is only a foot below
     the surface of the ground, it is easily mined.

  BARTON R.

       *       *       *       *       *

     DEAR SANTA CLAUS,--Will you please give me a drum for a Christmas
     present? I won't drum with it in the house, and I'll let my
     brothers drum too. Papa said if I wrote to HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE,
     maybe you would see it, and send me one. I am seven years old, and
     my name is Hammond W. I live in Monticello, Sullivan Co., N. Y.

     Papa has taken YOUNG PEOPLE for us for two years, and this year it
     is mine. Please put this in, so I can get the drum.

  HAMMOND W.

       *       *       *       *       *

     My brother and myself have a little pony that is real cunning. I
     was riding the other day, and a boy threw a snow-ball at her, and
     she ran after him just as fast as she could go, and he had to jump
     over a fence. The pony throws me off every time she gets a chance.
     I put my arm out of joint a few months ago, and it is not strong
     yet. I have a trapeze and some parallel rings. I can perform a
     great many tricks. The water is nearly as high now as it was in the
     spring. I was in Milwaukee a few weeks ago, and I saw the place
     where Matthew Carpenter was buried, but did not go near it. I tried
     to ride the bicycle that my brother rides, and I don't want to try
     again. I have a collection of 950 stamps, and I will exchange rare
     stamps, such as New Zealand, Servia, etc., for rare stamps and
     coins.

  C. B. BIRD, Jefferson, Wis.

       *       *       *       *       *

  APOLLO, PENNSYLVANIA.

     I am a boy just twelve years old. My brother takes YOUNG PEOPLE for
     Blanche and me, on condition that we shall not read novels. We are
     having a new iron bridge, which will be free, built across the
     river at this place. They have four piers built, and still have one
     more, besides the two abutments, to finish. We used to pay toll
     across the old bridge, which was carried away when the ice came
     down the river last spring.

     We have good coasting here in winter, as this is only a little
     country town of about fifteen hundred inhabitants. Our school
     re-opened in September, and will be in session six months.

     I have three sisters and four brothers. Paul, the youngest, is a
     chubby little fellow of two.

  A. LINCOLN C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  COLFAX, CALIFORNIA.

     In YOUNG PEOPLE No. 103 I saw a letter from Augusta C., South
     Glastenbury, Connecticut. This young lady says she hates cats. I
     should judge that she never had any. I disagree with her entirely.
     Almost any cat, if fed well and petted, will make as affectionate a
     little pet as one can desire. I have had a great many cats. When I
     was a little girl, about five or six years old, I had a very nice
     pussy, which I named Rose. She was exceedingly good and gentle, and
     would allow me to dress her in my doll's clothes, and rock her in
     my toy cradle. I have a very pretty kitten now. She is black, with
     dainty white paws, and great sleepy yellow eyes. She is very gentle
     and loving, and purrs loudly whenever I fondle her. I have named
     her Niketa. I hope Miss Augusta will see that she is mistaken in
     saying that _all_ cats are treacherous, and "care for nothing but
     their own comfort." I know of many cases where cats have displayed
     their love for human beings.

  JEANNIE K. P.

       *       *       *       *       *

  EMMETSBURG, IOWA.

     My little brother is off with papa in the country, and I hope you
     will publish my letter so that I can surprise him, as I am going to
     keep it secret. I am almost seven, and can ride nicely. We have a
     pony named Bonny, and I have been riding all day; three of us
     little ones ride at the same time, and sometimes four, but not far.
     I had a cat named Fannie, and we had to have her killed this
     morning, for she had an awful spasm. We had three pet lambs, Gypsy,
     Topsy, and Flirt, but we have sent them to the farm for the winter.
     Mamma is writing for me. "Good-night, and pleasant dreams."

  DAISY O.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEENAH, WISCONSIN.

     I am a little boy seven years old. I have a dog named Rover. I go
     to school to my auntie. I have no sister nor brother here, but I
     have two little sisters in heaven. My mamma gave me an express
     wagon. I am going to take YOUNG PEOPLE until I am a big man.

  ALLIE HARWOOD L.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEWARK, NEW JERSEY.

     I go to the public school, and take advantage of all that my
     teacher tells us. We have a very good teacher; her name is Miss H.
     The boys and girls saved their pennies and bought pictures, etc.,
     to decorate our room. Do you not think that it is nice to see that
     your room is the nicest room in the school? When we are through our
     lessons we can go to a table, which is called the reading-table.
     Here you can find story-books of all kinds, and among these is
     HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE. On the same table you can also find cubes,
     scales, measures, weights, etc. We are all the time saying, If we
     only could see something about our school! and I hope that you will
     print this in the Post-office Box. We will visit HARPER'S YOUNG
     PEOPLE one of these days.

     Is this written plain enough?

  C. F. K.

Written so plainly that tired eyes were rested when they read it. It is
a splendid idea to have that reading-table in your class-room.

       *       *       *       *       *

  ATHENS, GEORGIA.

     I am nine years of age. I have a pet cat, and her name is Beauty,
     and I have a dog whose name is Rex. I have a sister older than
     myself; she is ten years of age. I go to school to Miss Fannie A. I
     like her very well, although she sometimes scolds. I have an uncle
     who sends us the YOUNG PEOPLE. I liked "All-Hallow-eve" very much.
     My sister Hallie has a pet dog, whose name is Flirt. She is so
     timid that if you go in the yard with a stick, and make believe
     that you are going to whip her, she will get down on her stomach,
     and keep right still until you go away. I think this is long
     enough, so good-by.

     Your friend,

  ANNIE H.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WOODSIDE, NEAR LINCOLNTON, NORTH CAROLINA.

     I wish again, my dear young friends, to thank you for the books,
     papers, and the box of things for the Christmas tree that have come
     since I wrote to you last. I am so glad you keep sending them, for
     I find so many who need them, and to whom they will do so much
     good. We have some money, and will begin having the lumber for the
     school-house hauled to the mill to be sawed very soon now--as soon
     as the men sow their wheat and get in their corn. The parcels I
     have received have been from Miss Emma Joiner, Easton, Md.; Miss
     Julia Langden, Elmira, N. Y.; Rev. David Strang, Lincoln, Tenn.;
     Mrs. E. A. Clark, Battle Creek, Mich.; Miss Maria McRene Suydam,
     Newark, N. J.; Miss Mary O'Neil, Miss Clara Copeland, Miss Harper,
     Miss Millie Glover, Miss Hattie Burgess, Miss Cora Cote, Miss Livia
     Mandeville, Miss Grace Webb, Miss Etta Coulter, and Miss Hattie
     Plinney, Rochester, N. Y.; Miss Mary Harkell, Weathersfield, Vt.;
     Master Charles Graff, Harlem, New York City; Miss Carrie Yardley,
     Lockhaven, Penn.; Mrs. Harrison, Walnut Creek, Col.; Mrs. P. A.
     Harrison, Dewbury, Barry County, Mich.; Miss McFarland and Mrs.
     Snyder, Paxton, Ill.; Miss Miriam Oliver, Milwaukee, Wis.; Master
     Paul Krughoff, Nashville, Ill.; Master N. B. Blunt, Lexington
     Avenue, New York City; Miss Annie Wetzell, Grand Rapids, Mich.;
     Master George R. Hitchcock, Champlain, N. Y.; Miss Helen Woodworth,
     268 Ryerson Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.; Master Walter Anderson,
     Nashville, Ill.; Mrs. S. B. Bortwick, South Amboy, N. J.; Miss
     Ethel and Master Vivian Ketchum, Augusta, Ill.; Miss Minna
     Mandeville, Kinderhook, N. Y.: Miss M. D. L., Madison, N. J.; Miss
     Corinne Redden, Master Bertie Ellis, and Miss Winnie Needles,
     Nashville, Ill.; Miss Slack, Bristol, Penn.

     Our school keeps growing, and now numbers fifty-six. They are
     learning very well indeed. They are now learning on Saturday
     afternoons a carol to sing at Christmas! Not many can read; they
     have to learn the words orally. They catch the tune very quickly.
     They are looking forward with so much pleasure to the expected tree
     at Christmas. I wish I could tell you what a happy time it will be
     for them all, and how often I wish that you could all spend a
     Sunday with us, and see how pleased they are to be learning. We
     do--all of us who teach them--thank you so much for your kind and
     generous help! I will write you all about the tree after Christmas.
     Truly your grateful friend,

  MRS. RICHARDSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

  JACKSONVILLE, ILLINOIS.

     The Editor said that we little girls must write about our dolls, so
     I thought I would. I have not seen any letters from this place. I
     must begin to write about my dolls. I have seven baby dolls--Lillie
     (a wax one), Daisy, Phoebe (she is wax too), Mattie, Ludie,
     Boneby, and last a little doll, not an inch long, called Neil. I
     had four birds, and they all died; three doves and five cats, and
     they all ran away or were killed. I now have a white and black cat.
     Mamma drives a spirited horse, and we all make a great pet of him.

  GRACE A. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

  NEWARK, NEW JERSEY.

     I am a little girl six years old. My brother takes HARPER'S YOUNG
     PEOPLE, but I love to read it, and I read it all myself. I like to
     read the letters best. I have been reading since I was four years
     old, and we have had YOUNG PEOPLE from the first, and on rainy days
     we get the numbers out and look them all over. We have two dogs
     named Beaut and Snooze. Snooze has a "bobtail." I have a black cat,
     with a few white spots, named Harry, and when I take him up he puts
     his two paws around my neck, as though he wanted to love me. He
     never scratches or acts ugly to me. I have three dolls, named
     Fannie, Bessie, and Nellie. I have a cousin Anna, just my size, and
     we play together often. I go to Sunday-school every Sunday, and
     learn the Golden Text; then I get a pink ticket for saying it, and
     when I have four pink tickets, I get a pretty floral card for
     them. I study at home with mamma. I can read, spell, and cipher,
     and now I am learning to write. I hope to see my letter in YOUNG
     PEOPLE. Mamma is writing this letter for me, but I told her what to
     write. Your friend,

  HATTIE C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS.

     I have a hen-house of my own, and I am going to keep hens this
     winter. I have fifteen brown Leghorns and a rooster. I have made a
     silo, and filled it with sorrel for them to eat in the winter. If
     any of the boys who read YOUNG PEOPLE keep hens, I would like to
     hear from them. I have a cat that weighs thirteen pounds. I am
     eleven years old.

  H. EVERETT C.

       *       *       *       *       *

  FAIRVIEW, LOUISIANA.

     I am a little Southern girl nine years old. My grandpa has taken
     Harper's publications as long as my mamma can remember, and has
     taken YOUNG PEOPLE for me ever since it came out. I have never been
     to a school, as there is none near us. I said my lessons to a
     Northern lady who was visiting her sister last year for four
     months, and she taught me all I know about writing. I say my
     lessons to mamma now. I think YOUNG PEOPLE is splendid. I live on a
     plantation about a mile from the Mississippi River. When it is
     high, we can read the names of the boats. It seems so strange to
     read about snow up North, when we have not had a frost. We have
     geraniums growing in the yard, and plenty of roses in bloom. We
     have nine pecan-trees; they are full of pecans. I have four dolls,
     and lots of play-things. Bob, Buddy, and I have a play-house under
     the grape-vine. I like to play with dolls very much.

  H. M. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

  BROOKLYN, NEW YORK.

     I have three tame turtles. I put them all in a row to see which one
     can go the fastest. But the two big ones have now made their way
     into the ground, and left the little one behind, and so I have
     helped the little one to make its way into the ground with the
     others. I have a lot of pigeons, and I have some chickens. We were
     going out to the woods to-day to get some autumn leaves and moss,
     but it rained, so I thought I would write a letter to you.

  JESSE W. P.

       *       *       *       *       *

MODIE G.--Your friend who thinks the Editor of YOUNG PEOPLE writes the
letters in Our Post-office Box is mistaken. If she could only see what a
budget awaits the Editor every morning, she would open her eyes quite
wide with amazement. We are glad you learn to recite the pretty poems
which are printed in YOUNG PEOPLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some of you are now and then puzzled and disappointed because your paper
suddenly ceases to come to you on its usual day; you wonder what has
happened to it. Let us tell you how to make such a provoking experience
impossible. On the left-hand corner of the cover, just after the number
of the volume, you will observe the number of the paper for the current
week. Now look at the little printed label which bears your name, and on
the right of your name you will perceive certain figures; they tell you
the number of HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE with which your subscription will
expire. Within a few weeks of that number's arrival, ask papa to please
renew the paper for you, and it will then go on without an interruption.

       *       *       *       *       *

WILLIE AND OTHERS.--Mud-turtles are managed during the winter just as
land-turtles are; that is, given a tub of wet sand, and allowed to
burrow there and go to sleep, as they do in the marshes where they live
in freedom. You will find paragraphs about turtles in the Post-office
Box of Nos. 5, 28, and 51, Vol. I.

       *       *       *       *       *

C. Y. P. R. U.

So far as she can, the Postmistress answers questions and publishes
letters in the order of their reception. Nobody need feel slighted if
attention to him or her is deferred. The turn of each will come in time.

And now to reply to some of the inquiries which are winking their
inquisitive eyes like animated interrogation points while the
Postmistress puts on her thinking-cap:

What were the original Seven Wonders of the World? They were these: 1.
The Pyramids of Egypt. 2. The Mausoleum built for Mausolus, King of
Caria, by his queen Artemisia. 3. The Temple of Diana at Ephesus. 4. The
Walls and Hanging Gardens of Babylon. 5. The vast brazen image of the
sun at Rhodes, called the Colossus. 6. The ivory and gold statue of
Jupiter Olympus, at Olympia. 7. The Pharos, or Watch-tower, built by
Ptolemy Philadelphus at Alexandria. You will find it an interesting and
profitable pursuit for the long winter evenings to read something about
these Wonders in the pages of ancient history. These Wonders were given
in the Post-Office Box of No. 61, Vol. II., but we repeat them for the
benefit of the C. Y. P. R. U.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am asked why the capital of France was called Paris. It derives its
name from the Parish, a tribe of aborigines whom Cæsar met and defeated
in his conquest of Gaul. This tribe occupied the island in the Seine on
which the famous Cathedral of Notre Dame stands.

       *       *       *       *       *

     DEAR POSTMISTRESS,--Can I do anything toward beautifying our ugly,
     old-fashioned parlor? It is covered with a horrid red and green
     Brussels carpet, an abomination to artistic eyes. The family
     photographs, in lozenge-shaped frames, adorn the walls, and the
     furniture is hopelessly hideous. Can you suggest anything? Don't
     mention Japanese fans or banners; mother wouldn't tolerate them.
     Don't speak of unbleached muslin curtains; they wouldn't be given
     house room. But do tell me how I can make the room look _livable_,
     for that is just what it does not look at present. An old
     school-mate is coming to visit me next month, and I blush to own
     it, but I am ashamed to have her see our dreadful parlor.

  HARRIET L.

The carpet and pictures, as you describe them, are discouraging. But
people must do the best they can under the circumstances which are
theirs. One of the pleasantest parlors I ever saw had a rag-carpet on
the floor, and a map of the United States, bordered by the heads of the
successive Presidents, on the wall. In the first place, keep your parlor
resplendently clean; don't permit the suspicion of dust or the trail of
stray shreds and thread on the too brilliant carpet. Admit the sunshine
and air every day. Fill the windows with plants--blooming plants, if
possible, but green, growing ones at all events. Fill a glass globe with
sprays of tradiscanthia, which grows rapidly in water, and set that on
the middle of the table. Bring your choicest books, and put them where
visitors can read them. "Bread of flour is good; but there is bread,
sweet as honey, if we would eat it, in a good book, and the family must
be poor indeed which, once in their lives, can not for such multipliable
barley loaves pay their baker's bill." I do not know why I think so, but
I am very sure that you have some books in your house; and believe me,
nothing furnishes a room more beautifully than a few books. I do not
admire fans and screens very much myself, and I am no friend to curtains
and tidies and such things, unless one has plenty of time to care for
them. But you have doubtless a large, old-fashioned sofa. Make a
generous-looking pillow to invite the weary head, and put it at one end
of the sofa, and at the other lay a gay patchwork quilt. Study harmony,
and even in an ugly room harmony will evolve a certain degree of beauty.
Every parlor should aim at some high effect. The key-note of your aim
should be comfort, and comfort carried to its ultimate superlative is
luxury.

The only way I know of to make a room look _livable_ is to live in it.
Sit in your parlor every day. Gather the household there every evening.
Don't be ashamed of the friendly, familiar faces on the walls, nor,
indeed, suffer in yourself any shame of any honest thing that belongs to
you or yours, your home or your environment. So advises the
Postmistress.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are indebted to the Rev. A. B. Russell, of Cumberland Furnace,
Dickson County, Tennessee, for the following interesting item
illustrating the reasoning power of animals. Necessity is the parent of
invention, and even a hog, it seems, can do something which resembles
thinking:

     We passed a full-grown hog with a cob usually in its mouth,
     especially when lying down, to enable it to breathe well, it having
     had its nose torn off at the extremity, some months ago, by a
     ferocious dog, to which I was witness. An instance of the reasoning
     of animal mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO BRONZE PLASTER OR SOAPSTONE FIGURES.--Give them a sizing of glue; rub
them down with a piece of flannel. Take equal parts of Prussian blue,
spruce ochre, and verditer, and mix with water, oil, or turpentine, each
separately; then mix together so as to produce the shade desired. Apply
with a small brush.

       *       *       *       *       *

L. M. E.--There are several excellent agricultural colleges in the
Eastern States. Among them are the State College of Agriculture and the
Mechanic Arts, at Orono, Maine; the Massachusetts Agricultural College,
at Amherst; New Hampshire College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts,
at Hanover; College of Agriculture, in connection with Cornell
University, at Ithaca, New York; Pennsylvania State College, Centre
County, Pennsylvania; and State Agricultural College, at Burlington,
Vermont. At any of these a student may be sure of the conditions which
you mention.

       *       *       *       *       *

The members of the C. Y. P. R. U. will find in this number the
conclusion of "The Wreck of the _Grosvenor_" to which we called their
attention last week, and an article of great interest on the
"Piano-forte," by Mrs. John Lillie.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUZZLES FROM YOUNG CONTRIBUTORS.

No. 1.

DOUBLE ENIGMA.

      In barter, not in sale.
        In liquor, not in juice.
      In umbrella, not in veil.
        In either, not in choose.
      In binding, not in wedge.
      In island, not in ledge.
      In rosy, not in pale.
      In drooping, not in frail.
  My whole are two favorite song-birds.

  ELSIE FAY.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 2.

A GEOGRAPHICAL PUZZLE.

  My first is the initial letter of a river in England.
  My second is that of a city in Pennsylvania.
  My third is that of a river in South America.
  My fourth, of an island off the coast of Labrador.
  My fifth is that of one of the States.
  My sixth, that of a noted summer resort.
  My seventh, that of a lake in Switzerland.
  My eighth, of a lake in Minnesota.
  My ninth, of a city in Austria.
  My tenth, of one of the British isles.
  My eleventh, of a branch of the Amazon.
  My twelfth, of a city in Italy.
  My whole is something you have lately enjoyed.

  KATIE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 3.

AN EASY ENIGMA.

  My first is in mouse, but not in rat.
  My second in kitten, but not in cat.
  My third in stag, but not in deer.
  My fourth is in milk, but not in beer.
  My fifth is in stone, but not in sand.
  And my whole is something that can not stand.

  KATIE M.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 4.

EASY WORD SQUARE.

1. A girl's name. 2. Death. 3. A token. 4. A mountain.

  PHIL I. PENE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 5.

BEHEADINGS.

Behead a story, and leave a beverage. A boy's nickname, and leave a
verb. Behead to annoy, and leave metal in its rough state. Behead a part
of a tree, and leave the edge of a wall. Behead an animal, and leave a
personal pronoun. The first letters of the beheaded words spell an
indispensable article of furniture.

  MAUD B.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN No. 106.

No. 1.

Burlington. Gentian.

No. 2.

Fox-hound.

No. 3.

  A M E N D
  M A N O R
  E N S U E
  N O U N S
  D R E S S

No. 4.

  C H A R D
  H I D E R
  I R E N E
  M E L T S
  B R A S S

       *       *       *       *       *

Correct answers to puzzles have been received from Jonas D. Cooper,
Bertie Wheeler, Arthur Zinn, Nathan Glucksman, Belle Walrath, Maggie
Cushing, William A. Lewis, "Lodestar."

       *       *       *       *       *

The following are the names of the little folks who have succeeded in
reproducing our artist's idea of Wiggle No. 22. We shall be glad if each
will send us his or her address:

W. M. Duff, George Strauss, "Scamp," H. Hull, Sadie E. Lyon, Bessie S.
Brown, L. H. Gibbs, "Tip," J. R., Peter B. Havenagh, J. A. H., Wilfred
Hostetter, E. S. C. (aged six years), Arthur Beames, Carl Woodruff, and
Gertie Davis.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_For Exchanges, see third page of cover._]




[Illustration: THE LAST OF THE THANKSGIVING FEAST.]




WHAT AM I?


I am brown or gray. I may be painted any color. Under some
circumstances, I am very annoying to sensitive ears. As I make no sound,
and am a fixture, so I can not annoy any one. My swift motion may give
uneasiness to those unaccustomed to me, but as I am an act of mutilation
performed by a person, which I am not, of course I can not stir. When in
rapid motion, with all my equipments, I am a very pretty sight. To some,
seeing me only suggests sickness and bitterness. I can't be seen, for I
am intangible, and can only be heard. I can't be heard, for when I am
done, no sound is heard, because I am an act, not a thing. I make no
sound when in motion. Poems have been written in my honor. Many
anathemas also have I excited, particularly from the sleepless. Yet I
don't see how it is possible for _me_--colorless, brown, soundless,
sharp, rasping, tasteless, bitter, motionless, vibrating, quiescent,
gliding--to excite either pleasurable or the contrary emotions in any
one. Absolutely valueless, save to my owner, I play an important part in
commerce. I am an article of merchandise, and very expensive. A little
of me goes a great way, and costs a great deal. I take up very little
space. In spacious quarters I require a large amount of leeway. Large
revenues are derived from me. I can be had for the taking, and generally
am regarded as a nuisance. No one can like me, I am so disagreeable; yet
to many I am the dearest thing they own. No owner would willingly part
with me. I am a protection, a home, and, to crown all, I am vegetable,
mineral, and medicinal.




ENIGMA.


  The lady treads her lofty halls,
    Her robes are long and fine,
  And because of my first their velvet folds
    With softest, lustre shine.

  And when the revel and rout are done,
    And the robes are laid away,
  Again my first the lady takes
    Through half the livelong day.

  Through every land beneath the sun
    Where Nature's touch we find,
  It's never my last that's "more than kin."
    Though always "less than kind."

  The sweetest lips that e'er were kissed
    Have to my whole been pressed:
  It rests on the knees of feeble age,
    On the infant's tender breast.




[Illustration]


  He did not read his book, but ate a deal of cake.
  And so, although he tried, he could not keep awake;
  Thus fast asleep he fell, and very, very soon
  He had a horrid nightmare, in the afternoon--
  The table grew an elephant, the cake changed to a tiger,
  And gobbled up his little self, who turned into a ni'ger.






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S YOUNG PEOPLE, NOVEMBER 29, 1881 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


